proof/summary.md, before:

# ChronoID: Sortable × Uncoordinated × Compact — Comprehensive Implementation Guide

|                      |                                    |
| :------------------- | :--------------------------------- |
| **Version**          | 1.0                                |
| **Epoch Standard**   | 2020-01-01 (Unix: 1577836800)      |
| **Longevity Target** | 250+ Years (Generational Standard) |

---

## 1. Executive Summary

### The Trilemma: Sortable × Uncoordinated × Compact

**ChronoID** is a high-performance distributed identifier framework designed to solve the **Trilemma** of modern ID generation: **Sortability**, **Uncoordinated Scaling**, and **Storage Efficiency**.

Unlike UUIDs (128-bit, passive randomness) or Snowflake IDs (64-bit, rigid coordination), ChronoID uses a **Rotating Persona** architecture. It leverages the **Birthday Paradox** not as a risk factor, but as a calculated safety shield, allowing thousands of independent nodes to generate unique, time-ordered 64-bit or 32-bit IDs without a central registry.

### The Quad Hero Cases

1.  **Active Self-Healing (Mode A)**: Verified **100% recovery** from a 10,000-node mass-collision.
    - **Multi-Multiplier Divergence (Scenario 27)**: Proved instant divergence from forced collisions, verifying that 128 prime Weyl multipliers act as a mathematical repellent.
2.  **1-Billion ID Integrity (Mode B)**: Verified **zero collisions** across a 1,000,000,000 ID stress test.
3.  **Zero-Latency Global Routing (Mode C)**: Verified **23.6x faster** shard routing than lookups.
4.  **32-bit Tenant ID (`chrono32y`)**: Industry's first purpose-built FK, verified **55.4% storage savings**.

### Core Value Proposition

1.  **50% Storage Reduction:** Fits in native 64-bit integers (`bigint`), saving terabytes of index RAM compared to standard UUIDs.
2.  **Zero Coordination:** In Mode A, nodes require no knowledge of each other.
3.  **Maximum Ingestion Speed:** Verified up to **3.87x faster** record insertion than random identifiers (Theorem 4).
4.  **Polymorphic Engine:** A single standard that morphs between three modes (Stateless, Stateful, Managed).
5.  **Diamond Standard Verification:** All claims validated by a **27-scenario** Rust simulation suite with **128 prime Weyl multipliers**, including real-world SQLite B-Tree performance certification.

---

## 2. Mathematical Foundation

### 2.1 The Birthday Shield

In an uncoordinated system, uniqueness is probabilistic. ChronoID defines "Safety" based on the suffix entropy ($N+S$).
The number of safe parallel nodes ($k$) for a given risk probability ($p$) and entropy space ($N = 2^{bits}$) is approximated by:
$$k \approx \sqrt{2 \cdot N \cdot \ln(\frac{1}{1-p})} \approx \sqrt{2 \cdot N \cdot p}$$

- **Implication:** By rotating the "Node ID" and "Sequence Offset" frequently, we effectively reset the "Birthday Room," allowing high-concurrency bursts without long-term collision accumulation.

### 2.2 Weyl-Golden Active Self-Healing

Standard random IDs rely on passive probability. ChronoID uses **Fibonacci Hashing** combined with **Weyl Sequences**.

- **The Multiplier:** We use 128 hardcoded seeds derived from the Fractional Golden Ratio ($\phi^{-1} \approx 0.618...$).
- **The Guarantee:** If Node A and Node B accidentally pick the same Node ID and Salt at time $T$, they will almost certainly have different Multipliers ($M_a \neq M_b$).
  - $ID_a(T+1) = (Seq+1) \times M_a$
  - $ID_b(T+1) = (Seq+1) \times M_b$
  - Because the multipliers differ, the resulting IDs diverge instantly. The collision is mathematically forced to heal at the next tick.
    > [!IMPORTANT]
    > **Scenario 1: The 10,000-Node Hero Case.** We empirically verified that 10,000 overlapping nodes diverge completely upon their first rotation, achieving **100% recovery** from a catastrophic mass-collision event. This proves that uncoordinated scaling is mathematically enforced, not just a statistical hope.

---

## 3. Operational Modes

### Mode A: Autonomous Persona (Client-Side)

- **Best For:** Microservices, IoT, Mobile Apps, Serverless.
- **Mechanism:** The generator maintains a "Persona" state in RAM.
- **Rotation:** Every 60 seconds, the generator re-rolls its **Node ID**, **XOR Salt**, and **Multiplier Index** using a CSPRNG.
- **Sequence:** At the start of every new time window (e.g., new second), the sequence initializes to a **Random Offset**.
- **Burst Defense:** On sequence overflow → immediate persona re-roll (emergency rotation). Never stalls.
- **Clock Skew:** Backward clock jump → treated as burst event, triggers persona re-roll. Uniqueness preserved.
- **Advantages:** Zero network overhead; infinite horizontal scalability.
- **Disadvantages:** Collision risk is non-zero (statistical); unsuitable for low-entropy variants (`ms`, `us`).

### Mode B: Instance-Native (Database-Side)

- **Best For:** PostgreSQL Primary Keys, Monolithic Backends.
- **Mechanism:** The database instance assigns itself a global Node ID stored in an `UNLOGGED` table.
- **Sequence:** Uses native **PostgreSQL Sequences** (`nextval`) for maximum throughput.
- **Rotation:** On time expiry (10 mins) or sequence burst, the DB performs a **Weyl-Step Rotation** (`Node = (Node + Constant) % Max`), with full-period cycle guarantee.
- **Burst Defense:** On sequence overflow → immediate Weyl-Step rotation. Never stalls.
- **Clock Skew:** Sequence is monotonic regardless of wall clock; uniqueness preserved. ✅ **Verified** (Scenario 7).
- **Advantages:** **0% Internal Collision Risk**; supports high-frequency variants (`us`, `ms`).
- **Disadvantages:** Requires persistent DB connection; multi-DB setups require statistical safety analysis.

### Mode C: Managed Registry (Strict)

- **Best For:** High-Frequency Trading, Banking, Kernel Tracing.
- **Mechanism:** Node IDs are strictly assigned by a central authority (Redis, Etcd, ConfigMap).
- **Burst Strategy:** If the sequence overflows, the generator **spin-waits** for the next time tick (Node cannot change — it encodes routing identity).
- **Empirical Proof:** Scenarios 5 & 14 verified 100% routing stability across parallel shards and confirmed that execution time scales linearly with forced wait-ticks during bursts.
- **Advantages:** **0% Global Collision Risk** (Deterministic).
- **Disadvantages:** Operational complexity (registry is a SPOF; mitigate with Redis Sentinel / Etcd cluster).

---

## 4. `uchrono64` & `chrono64` (The Scale Tier)

**Standard:** 250+ Years | **Signed:** MSB=0 (Postgres compatible)
_Unsigned (`uchrono`) allocates the extra bit to the **Node** field (not Sequence) because the Birthday bound scales with $\sqrt{2^{b_N}}$ — adding 1 bit to Node gives a 41% increase in safe parallel generators._

### 4.1 Primary Key Variants (High Entropy)

_Designed for Mode A. Safe for uncoordinated scaling._

| Variant | Precision | Bits (T/N/S) |  Expiry  | $N+S$ Entropy (U/S) | **1 in 1k** (0.1%) | **1 in 1M** ($10^{-6}$) | **1 in 1B** ($10^{-9}$) | Use Case               |
| :------ | :-------- | :----------: | :------: | :-----------------: | :----------------: | :---------------------: | :---------------------: | :--------------------- |
| **mo**  | Month     |   12/26/26   |   2361   |       52 / 51       |        3.0M        |           94k           |        **3,000**        | Global SaaS / Billing  |
| **w**   | Week      |   14/26/24   |   2334   |       50 / 49       |        1.5M        |           47k           |        **1,500**        | IoT Fleet Sync         |
| **d**   | Day       |   17/24/23   |   2378   |       47 / 46       |        530k        |           16k           |         **530**         | Data Lakes / Archival  |
| **h**   | Hour      |   21/22/21   |   2258   |       43 / 42       |        132k        |          4.1k           |         **132**         | Infrastructure Metrics |
| **m**   | Minute    |   27/19/18   |   2275   |       37 / 36       |        16k         |           524           |         **16**          | Massive Microservices  |
| **s**   | Second    |   33/16/15   | **2292** |       31 / 30       |       2,072        |           65            |          **2**          | **Standard DB Keys**   |

### 4.2 High-Frequency Variants (Low Entropy)

_Optimized for speed. `ms` and `us` require Mode B or C._

| Variant | Precision | Bits (T/N/S) |  Expiry  | $N+S$ (U/S) | **1 in 1k** | **Mode B** | **Mode C** | Use Case              |
| :------ | :-------- | :----------: | :------: | :---------: | :---------: | :--------: | :--------: | :-------------------- |
| **ds**  | Decisec   |   36/15/13   | **2237** |   28 / 27   |   **732**   |    Safe    |    Safe    | High-Freq App Logs    |
| **cs**  | Centisec  |   40/12/12   | **2368** |   24 / 23   |   **183**   |    Safe    |    Safe    | Event Sourcing (10ms) |
| **ms**  | ms        |   43/11/10   |   2298   |   21 / 20   |     64      |  **Safe**  |  **Safe**  | Real-time Systems     |
| **us**  | $\mu$s    |    53/6/5    |   2305   |   11 / 10   |      2      |  **Safe**  |  **Safe**  | Kernel Events (1µs)   |

---

## 5. `uchrono32` & `chrono32` (The Compact Tier)

**Standard:** 250+ Years | **Signed:** 31-bit (Postgres `INT`)

### 5.1 Identity-Focused (Uncoordinated Safe)

_Can be used as distributed Primary Keys in Mode A._

| Variant | Precision | Bits (T/N/S) | Expiry | $N+S$ (U/S) | **1 in 1k Nodes** | **1 in 1M Nodes** | Primary Use Case       |
| :------ | :-------- | :----------: | :----: | :---------: | :---------------: | :---------------: | :--------------------- |
| **y**   | Year      |   8/13/11    |  2276  |   24 / 23   |      **183**      |         6         | Member / Tenant IDs    |
| **hy**  | Half-Year |   9/12/11    |  2276  |   23 / 22   |      **129**      |         4         | Contract Records       |
| **q**   | Quarter   |   10/11/11   |  2276  |   22 / 21   |      **91**       |         3         | Fiscal / Audit Logs    |
| **mo**  | Month     |   12/11/10   |  2361  |   21 / 20   |      **64**       |         2         | Subscription / Billing |
| **w**   | Week      |   14/10/9    |  2334  |   19 / 18   |      **32**       |         1         | IoT Home Mesh          |
| **d**   | Day       |    17/8/7    |  2378  |   15 / 14   |       **8**       |         0         | Small Biz Inventory    |

### 5.2 Sort-Key Focused (Precision)

_Collisions are "Ties". Use for Partitioning or Mode B/C._

| Variant | Precision   | Bits (T/N/S) | Expiry | Suffix Entropy | **Safe Nodes** | Sort Utility           |
| :------ | :---------- | :----------: | :----: | :------------: | :------------: | :--------------------- |
| **h**   | Hour        |    22/5/5    |  2498  |    10 bits     |     **1**      | Single-Node Shift Sort |
| **tm**  | 10-Min      |    24/4/4    |  2339  |     8 bits     |   **Manual**   | Batch Partitioning     |
| **m**   | Minute      |    28/2/2    |  2530  |     4 bits     |   **Single**   | Local App Sorting      |
| **bs**  | Bi-Sec (2s) |    32/0/0    |  2292  |     0 bits     |    **None**    | **32-bit Sort Index**  |

---

## 6. Implementation Reference (SQL/Logic)

### 6.1 The Weyl-Golden Mixer (`uchrono_mix`)

This function is universal. It performs the bitwise permutation.

```sql
-- 64 Hardcoded 64-bit Weyl-Golden Seeds
m_basket CONSTANT bigint[] := ARRAY[
  -7046029254386353131, -12316578052163351, ...
];

-- Input: Value (Node or Seq), Bits (Width), P_Idx (Multiplier Index), Salt
FUNCTION uchrono_mix(v_val, v_bits, v_p_idx, v_salt) {
    v_mask = (1 << v_bits) - 1;
    -- Seed >> Shift | 1 ensures ODD multiplier
    v_mult = ((m_basket[(v_p_idx & 127) + 1] >> (64 - v_bits)) | 1);
    -- (LCG * Mult) XOR Salt
    return ((v_val * v_mult) # v_salt) & v_mask;
}
```

### 6.2 Mode B Rotation Logic (Weyl-Step)

Used in Instance-Native mode to cycle Node IDs without repetition or prediction.

```sql
-- Rotate Node ID: (Current + 0x9E37...) % Mask
UPDATE state SET
    current_node_id = (current_node_id + ((3535253579 & mask) | 1)) & mask,
    current_salt = random_salt(),
    next_rotation = now + 600; -- 10 Minutes
```

---

## 7. Comparative Analysis

### ChronoID vs. UUID v7

_`chrono64s` is the recommended **default** for general-purpose database keys._

| Feature       | UUID v7 (Standard) | ChronoID `s` ⭐ (Default) | ChronoID `us` (Mode B) |
| :------------ | :----------------- | :------------------------ | :--------------------- |
| **Storage**   | 16 Bytes           | **8 Bytes (50% less)**    | **8 Bytes**            |
| **CPU Speed** | 1.0x (Baseline)    | **2.85x Faster**          | **~2.85x Faster**      |
| **Ingestion** | 1.0x (Baseline)    | **3.87x Faster**          | **~3.87x Faster**      |
| **Sorting**   | 1 ms               | 1 second                  | **1 µs (1000× finer)** |
| **Safety**    | Passive Random     | **Active Self-Healing**   | **0% Collision**       |
| **Lifespan**  | Long               | **250+ Years**            | **250+ Years**         |

### ChronoID vs. Snowflake

| Feature          | Twitter Snowflake         | ChronoID Mode A         | ChronoID Mode B         |
| :--------------- | :------------------------ | :---------------------- | :---------------------- |
| **Coordination** | **Required** (Zookeeper)  | **None** (Auto-Persona) | **Internal** (Sequence) |
| **Failure Mode** | System Halt (No WorkerID) | Statistical Risk        | Burst Rotation          |
| **Lifespan**     | ~69 Years                 | **250+ Years**          | **250+ Years**          |

### ChronoID vs. Modern Contenders

| Feature          | ULID        | KSUID       | TSID        | Cuid2       | **ChronoID**          |
| :--------------- | :---------- | :---------- | :---------- | :---------- | :-------------------- |
| **Storage**      | ❌ 16 bytes | ❌ 20 bytes | ✅ 8 bytes  | ❌ 16 bytes | ✅ **8 bytes (or 4)** |
| **Native INT**   | ❌ No       | ❌ No       | ✅ `bigint` | ❌ No       | ✅ **`bigint`/`int`** |
| **Self-Healing** | ❌ None     | ❌ None     | ❌ None     | ❌ None     | ✅ **99.2% diverge**  |
| **Polymorphic**  | ❌ Fixed    | ❌ Fixed    | ❌ Fixed    | ❌ Fixed    | ✅ **3 modes**        |
| **FK Tier**      | ❌ 16 bytes | ❌ 20 bytes | ❌ 8 bytes  | ❌ 16 bytes | ✅ **chrono32y: 4B**  |

---

## 8. Final Recommendation Matrix

It lists the **Signed** (`chrono`) variants for maximum compatibility with PostgreSQL (`bigint`/`integer`), Java, and Go.

| If your requirement is...  | The Best Variant is... | Why?                                                          |
| :------------------------- | :--------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **General Purpose DB Key** | **`chrono64s`**        | 1-second sorting. Native `bigint` compatible. 250+ year life. |
| **High-Volume Event Log**  | **`chrono64ds`**       | 100ms sorting. **~517** safe uncoordinated nodes (Signed).    |
| **Massive Cloud Cluster**  | **`chrono64m`**        | Minute precision. Supports **~11,000** pods blindly.          |
| **Tenant / Shard ID**      | **`chrono32y`**        | Fits in signed `INT`. **23-bit** entropy (~8.3M IDs/year).    |
| **Maximum Precision**      | **`chrono64us`**       | 1µs resolution (Mode B). Faster/Smaller than UUIDv7.          |

---

> **Implementation Note:**
> The table above defaults to **Signed** variants (`chrono`) to ensure the MSB is always `0`, preventing negative numbers in Java or Postgres.
>
> **For Higher Entropy:** If your language or database supports **Unsigned Integers** (e.g., Rust, C++, MySQL, Solidity), use the **`uchrono`** (Unsigned) equivalent.
>
> - **Benefit:** Reclaims the sign bit, adding it to the **Node field** (not Sequence) — a 41% increase in safe parallel nodes.
> - **Empirical Status:** ✅ **Verified Hero Case.** Simulation Scenario 1 proved **100% recovery** for a Catastrophic 10,000-node mass-collision.
> - **Critical Data:** Simulation Scenario 9 proves that Signed IDs carry a **1.6x higher statistical risk** than Unsigned; choose Signed only when language support forces it.
> - _Example:_ `uchrono32y` offers **16.7 Million** IDs/year (24-bit), whereas `chrono32y` offers **8.3 Million** (23-bit).
> - _Human-Readable:_ `chrono32y` encodes as a **9-character hyphenated hex** string (e.g., `1F4A-9C2B`) — compact, URL-safe, and verified **Sort-Stable** (Scenario 13).

Commit message:

feat: implement JavaScript Chrono-ID and enforce global UTC parity
- Complete implementation of the JavaScript/TypeScript Chrono-ID library.
    - Engineered core generator supporting 22+ variants across 64-bit and 32-bit tiers.
    - Integrated Weyl-Golden active self-healing mixing logic for bit-parity.
    - Added full TypeScript definitions and cross-environment (Node.js/Browser) support.
    - Developed a comprehensive test suite with shared logic for Node.js and Browser environments.
- Enforce strict UTC standard across Python and JavaScript implementations.
    - Implement absolute timestamp normalization and treat naive datetimes as UTC for parity.
    - Ensure all generation methods and time extraction return UTC-aware objects.
- Documentation and Proof Sync:
    - Mandate UTC across project README, mathematical proof, and executive summary.
    - Align the global Epoch Standard to 2020-01-01T00:00:00Z.
- Weyl Toolchain Enhancements:
    - Refactor multiplier generation tool for better persistence and formatting.
    - Improve error reporting and linting for Diamond Standard compliance.

proof/summary.md, after:

# ChronoID: Sortable × Uncoordinated × Compact — Comprehensive Implementation Guide

|                      |                                      |
| :------------------- | :----------------------------------- |
| **Version**          | 1.0                                  |
| **Epoch Standard**   | 2020-01-01T00:00:00Z (Universal UTC) |
| **Longevity Target** | 250+ Years (Generational Standard)   |

---

## 1. Executive Summary

### The Trilemma: Sortable × Uncoordinated × Compact

**ChronoID** is a high-performance distributed identifier framework designed to solve the **Trilemma** of modern ID generation: **Sortability**, **Uncoordinated Scaling**, and **Storage Efficiency**.

Unlike UUIDs (128-bit, passive randomness) or Snowflake IDs (64-bit, rigid coordination), ChronoID uses a **Rotating Persona** architecture. It leverages the **Birthday Paradox** not as a risk factor, but as a calculated safety shield, allowing thousands of independent nodes to generate unique, time-ordered 64-bit or 32-bit IDs without a central registry.

### The Quad Hero Cases

1.  **Active Self-Healing (Mode A)**: Verified **100% recovery** from a 10,000-node mass-collision.
    - **Multi-Multiplier Divergence (Scenario 27)**: Proved instant divergence from forced collisions, verifying that 128 prime Weyl multipliers act as a mathematical repellent.
2.  **1-Billion ID Integrity (Mode B)**: Verified **zero collisions** across a 1,000,000,000 ID stress test.
3.  **Zero-Latency Global Routing (Mode C)**: Verified **23.6x faster** shard routing than lookups.
4.  **32-bit Tenant ID (`chrono32y`)**: Industry's first purpose-built FK, verified **55.4% storage savings**.

### Core Value Proposition

1.  **50% Storage Reduction:** Fits in native 64-bit integers (`bigint`), saving terabytes of index RAM compared to standard UUIDs.
2.  **Zero Coordination:** In Mode A, nodes require no knowledge of each other.
3.  **Maximum Ingestion Speed:** Verified up to **3.87x faster** record insertion than random identifiers (Theorem 4).
4.  **Polymorphic Engine:** A single standard that morphs between three modes (Stateless, Stateful, Managed).
5.  **Diamond Standard Verification:** All claims validated by a **27-scenario** Rust simulation suite with **128 prime Weyl multipliers**, including real-world SQLite B-Tree performance certification.
6.  **Universal UTC Parity:** All implementations mandate absolute UTC timestamp calculation, ensuring that an ID generated in any timezone is bit-identical for the same absolute instant.

---

## 2. Mathematical Foundation

### 2.1 The Birthday Shield

In an uncoordinated system, uniqueness is probabilistic. ChronoID defines "Safety" based on the suffix entropy ($N+S$).
The number of safe parallel nodes ($k$) for a given risk probability ($p$) and entropy space ($N = 2^{bits}$) is approximated by:
$$k \approx \sqrt{2 \cdot N \cdot \ln(\frac{1}{1-p})} \approx \sqrt{2 \cdot N \cdot p}$$

- **Implication:** By rotating the "Node ID" and "Sequence Offset" frequently, we effectively reset the "Birthday Room," allowing high-concurrency bursts without long-term collision accumulation.

### 2.2 Weyl-Golden Active Self-Healing

Standard random IDs rely on passive probability. ChronoID uses **Fibonacci Hashing** combined with **Weyl Sequences**.

- **The Multiplier:** We use 128 hardcoded seeds derived from the Fractional Golden Ratio ($\phi^{-1} \approx 0.618...$).
- **The Guarantee:** If Node A and Node B accidentally pick the same Node ID and Salt at time $T$, they will almost certainly have different Multipliers ($M_a \neq M_b$).
  - $ID_a(T+1) = (Seq+1) \times M_a$
  - $ID_b(T+1) = (Seq+1) \times M_b$
  - Because the multipliers differ, the resulting IDs diverge instantly. The collision is mathematically forced to heal at the next tick.
    > [!IMPORTANT]
    > **Scenario 1: The 10,000-Node Hero Case.** We empirically verified that 10,000 overlapping nodes diverge completely upon their first rotation, achieving **100% recovery** from a catastrophic mass-collision event. This proves that uncoordinated scaling is mathematically enforced, not just a statistical hope.

---

## 3. Operational Modes

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Universal Time Standard:** All operational modes mandate the use of **UTC** for timestamp extraction and rotation calculations. Local time jumps (DST, timezone shifts) must NOT affect the internal state.

### Mode A: Autonomous Persona (Client-Side)

- **Best For:** Microservices, IoT, Mobile Apps, Serverless.
- **Mechanism:** The generator maintains a "Persona" state in RAM.
- **Rotation:** Every 60 seconds, the generator re-rolls its **Node ID**, **XOR Salt**, and **Multiplier Index** using a CSPRNG.
- **Sequence:** At the start of every new time window (e.g., new second), the sequence initializes to a **Random Offset**.
- **Burst Defense:** On sequence overflow → immediate persona re-roll (emergency rotation). Never stalls.
- **Clock Skew:** Backward clock jump → treated as burst event, triggers persona re-roll. Uniqueness preserved.
- **Advantages:** Zero network overhead; infinite horizontal scalability.
- **Disadvantages:** Collision risk is non-zero (statistical); unsuitable for low-entropy variants (`ms`, `us`).

### Mode B: Instance-Native (Database-Side)

- **Best For:** PostgreSQL Primary Keys, Monolithic Backends.
- **Mechanism:** The database instance assigns itself a global Node ID stored in an `UNLOGGED` table.
- **Sequence:** Uses native **PostgreSQL Sequences** (`nextval`) for maximum throughput.
- **Rotation:** On time expiry (10 mins) or sequence burst, the DB performs a **Weyl-Step Rotation** (`Node = (Node + Constant) % Max`), with full-period cycle guarantee.
- **Burst Defense:** On sequence overflow → immediate Weyl-Step rotation. Never stalls.
- **Clock Skew:** Sequence is monotonic regardless of wall clock; uniqueness preserved. ✅ **Verified** (Scenario 7).
- **Advantages:** **0% Internal Collision Risk**; supports high-frequency variants (`us`, `ms`).
- **Disadvantages:** Requires persistent DB connection; multi-DB setups require statistical safety analysis.

### Mode C: Managed Registry (Strict)

- **Best For:** High-Frequency Trading, Banking, Kernel Tracing.
- **Mechanism:** Node IDs are strictly assigned by a central authority (Redis, Etcd, ConfigMap).
- **Burst Strategy:** If the sequence overflows, the generator **spin-waits** for the next time tick (Node cannot change — it encodes routing identity).
- **Empirical Proof:** Scenarios 5 & 14 verified 100% routing stability across parallel shards and confirmed that execution time scales linearly with forced wait-ticks during bursts.
- **Advantages:** **0% Global Collision Risk** (Deterministic).
- **Disadvantages:** Operational complexity (registry is a SPOF; mitigate with Redis Sentinel / Etcd cluster).

---

## 4. `uchrono64` & `chrono64` (The Scale Tier)

**Standard:** 250+ Years | **Signed:** MSB=0 (Postgres compatible)
_Unsigned (`uchrono`) allocates the extra bit to the **Node** field (not Sequence) because the Birthday bound scales with $\sqrt{2^{b_N}}$ — adding 1 bit to Node gives a 41% increase in safe parallel generators._

### 4.1 Primary Key Variants (High Entropy)

_Designed for Mode A. Safe for uncoordinated scaling._

| Variant | Precision | Bits (T/N/S) |  Expiry  | $N+S$ Entropy (U/S) | **1 in 1k** (0.1%) | **1 in 1M** ($10^{-6}$) | **1 in 1B** ($10^{-9}$) | Use Case               |
| :------ | :-------- | :----------: | :------: | :-----------------: | :----------------: | :---------------------: | :---------------------: | :--------------------- |
| **mo**  | Month     |   12/26/26   |   2361   |       52 / 51       |        3.0M        |           94k           |        **3,000**        | Global SaaS / Billing  |
| **w**   | Week      |   14/26/24   |   2334   |       50 / 49       |        1.5M        |           47k           |        **1,500**        | IoT Fleet Sync         |
| **d**   | Day       |   17/24/23   |   2378   |       47 / 46       |        530k        |           16k           |         **530**         | Data Lakes / Archival  |
| **h**   | Hour      |   21/22/21   |   2258   |       43 / 42       |        132k        |          4.1k           |         **132**         | Infrastructure Metrics |
| **m**   | Minute    |   27/19/18   |   2275   |       37 / 36       |        16k         |           524           |         **16**          | Massive Microservices  |
| **s**   | Second    |   33/16/15   | **2292** |       31 / 30       |       2,072        |           65            |          **2**          | **Standard DB Keys**   |

### 4.2 High-Frequency Variants (Low Entropy)

_Optimized for speed. `ms` and `us` require Mode B or C._

| Variant | Precision | Bits (T/N/S) |  Expiry  | $N+S$ (U/S) | **1 in 1k** | **Mode B** | **Mode C** | Use Case              |
| :------ | :-------- | :----------: | :------: | :---------: | :---------: | :--------: | :--------: | :-------------------- |
| **ds**  | Decisec   |   36/15/13   | **2237** |   28 / 27   |   **732**   |    Safe    |    Safe    | High-Freq App Logs    |
| **cs**  | Centisec  |   40/12/12   | **2368** |   24 / 23   |   **183**   |    Safe    |    Safe    | Event Sourcing (10ms) |
| **ms**  | ms        |   43/11/10   |   2298   |   21 / 20   |     64      |  **Safe**  |  **Safe**  | Real-time Systems     |
| **us**  | $\mu$s    |    53/6/5    |   2305   |   11 / 10   |      2      |  **Safe**  |  **Safe**  | Kernel Events (1µs)   |

---

## 5. `uchrono32` & `chrono32` (The Compact Tier)

**Standard:** 250+ Years | **Signed:** 31-bit (Postgres `INT`)

### 5.1 Identity-Focused (Uncoordinated Safe)

_Can be used as distributed Primary Keys in Mode A._

| Variant | Precision | Bits (T/N/S) | Expiry | $N+S$ (U/S) | **1 in 1k Nodes** | **1 in 1M Nodes** | Primary Use Case       |
| :------ | :-------- | :----------: | :----: | :---------: | :---------------: | :---------------: | :--------------------- |
| **y**   | Year      |   8/13/11    |  2276  |   24 / 23   |      **183**      |         6         | Member / Tenant IDs    |
| **hy**  | Half-Year |   9/12/11    |  2276  |   23 / 22   |      **129**      |         4         | Contract Records       |
| **q**   | Quarter   |   10/11/11   |  2276  |   22 / 21   |      **91**       |         3         | Fiscal / Audit Logs    |
| **mo**  | Month     |   12/11/10   |  2361  |   21 / 20   |      **64**       |         2         | Subscription / Billing |
| **w**   | Week      |   14/10/9    |  2334  |   19 / 18   |      **32**       |         1         | IoT Home Mesh          |
| **d**   | Day       |    17/8/7    |  2378  |   15 / 14   |       **8**       |         0         | Small Biz Inventory    |

### 5.2 Sort-Key Focused (Precision)

_Collisions are "Ties". Use for Partitioning or Mode B/C._

| Variant | Precision   | Bits (T/N/S) | Expiry | Suffix Entropy | **Safe Nodes** | Sort Utility           |
| :------ | :---------- | :----------: | :----: | :------------: | :------------: | :--------------------- |
| **h**   | Hour        |    22/5/5    |  2498  |    10 bits     |     **1**      | Single-Node Shift Sort |
| **tm**  | 10-Min      |    24/4/4    |  2339  |     8 bits     |   **Manual**   | Batch Partitioning     |
| **m**   | Minute      |    28/2/2    |  2530  |     4 bits     |   **Single**   | Local App Sorting      |
| **bs**  | Bi-Sec (2s) |    32/0/0    |  2292  |     0 bits     |    **None**    | **32-bit Sort Index**  |

---

## 6. Implementation Reference (SQL/Logic)

### 6.1 The Weyl-Golden Mixer (`uchrono_mix`)

This function is universal. It performs the bitwise permutation.

```sql
-- 64 Hardcoded 64-bit Weyl-Golden Seeds
m_basket CONSTANT bigint[] := ARRAY[
  -7046029254386353131, -12316578052163351, ...
];

-- Input: Value (Node or Seq), Bits (Width), P_Idx (Multiplier Index), Salt
FUNCTION uchrono_mix(v_val, v_bits, v_p_idx, v_salt) {
    v_mask = (1 << v_bits) - 1;
    -- Seed >> Shift | 1 ensures ODD multiplier
    v_mult = ((m_basket[(v_p_idx & 127) + 1] >> (64 - v_bits)) | 1);
    -- (LCG * Mult) XOR Salt
    return ((v_val * v_mult) # v_salt) & v_mask;
}
```

### 6.2 Mode B Rotation Logic (Weyl-Step)

Used in Instance-Native mode to cycle Node IDs without repetition or prediction.

```sql
-- Rotate Node ID: (Current + 0x9E37...) % Mask
UPDATE state SET
    current_node_id = (current_node_id + ((3535253579 & mask) | 1)) & mask,
    current_salt = random_salt(),
    next_rotation = now + 600; -- 10 Minutes
```

---

## 7. Comparative Analysis

### ChronoID vs. UUID v7

_`chrono64s` is the recommended **default** for general-purpose database keys._

| Feature       | UUID v7 (Standard) | ChronoID `s` ⭐ (Default) | ChronoID `us` (Mode B) |
| :------------ | :----------------- | :------------------------ | :--------------------- |
| **Storage**   | 16 Bytes           | **8 Bytes (50% less)**    | **8 Bytes**            |
| **CPU Speed** | 1.0x (Baseline)    | **2.85x Faster**          | **~2.85x Faster**      |
| **Ingestion** | 1.0x (Baseline)    | **3.87x Faster**          | **~3.87x Faster**      |
| **Sorting**   | 1 ms               | 1 second                  | **1 µs (1000× finer)** |
| **Safety**    | Passive Random     | **Active Self-Healing**   | **0% Collision**       |
| **Lifespan**  | Long               | **250+ Years**            | **250+ Years**         |

### ChronoID vs. Snowflake

| Feature          | Twitter Snowflake         | ChronoID Mode A         | ChronoID Mode B         |
| :--------------- | :------------------------ | :---------------------- | :---------------------- |
| **Coordination** | **Required** (Zookeeper)  | **None** (Auto-Persona) | **Internal** (Sequence) |
| **Failure Mode** | System Halt (No WorkerID) | Statistical Risk        | Burst Rotation          |
| **Lifespan**     | ~69 Years                 | **250+ Years**          | **250+ Years**          |

### ChronoID vs. Modern Contenders

| Feature          | ULID        | KSUID       | TSID        | Cuid2       | **ChronoID**          |
| :--------------- | :---------- | :---------- | :---------- | :---------- | :-------------------- |
| **Storage**      | ❌ 16 bytes | ❌ 20 bytes | ✅ 8 bytes  | ❌ 16 bytes | ✅ **8 bytes (or 4)** |
| **Native INT**   | ❌ No       | ❌ No       | ✅ `bigint` | ❌ No       | ✅ **`bigint`/`int`** |
| **Self-Healing** | ❌ None     | ❌ None     | ❌ None     | ❌ None     | ✅ **99.2% diverge**  |
| **Polymorphic**  | ❌ Fixed    | ❌ Fixed    | ❌ Fixed    | ❌ Fixed    | ✅ **3 modes**        |
| **FK Tier**      | ❌ 16 bytes | ❌ 20 bytes | ❌ 8 bytes  | ❌ 16 bytes | ✅ **chrono32y: 4B**  |

---

## 8. Final Recommendation Matrix

It lists the **Signed** (`chrono`) variants for maximum compatibility with PostgreSQL (`bigint`/`integer`), Java, and Go.

| If your requirement is...  | The Best Variant is... | Why?                                                          |
| :------------------------- | :--------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **General Purpose DB Key** | **`chrono64s`**        | 1-second sorting. Native `bigint` compatible. 250+ year life. |
| **High-Volume Event Log**  | **`chrono64ds`**       | 100ms sorting. **~517** safe uncoordinated nodes (Signed).    |
| **Massive Cloud Cluster**  | **`chrono64m`**        | Minute precision. Supports **~11,000** pods blindly.          |
| **Tenant / Shard ID**      | **`chrono32y`**        | Fits in signed `INT`. **23-bit** entropy (~8.3M IDs/year).    |
| **Maximum Precision**      | **`chrono64us`**       | 1µs resolution (Mode B). Faster/Smaller than UUIDv7.          |

---

> **Implementation Note:**
> The table above defaults to **Signed** variants (`chrono`) to ensure the MSB is always `0`, preventing negative numbers in Java or Postgres.
>
> **For Higher Entropy:** If your language or database supports **Unsigned Integers** (e.g., Rust, C++, MySQL, Solidity), use the **`uchrono`** (Unsigned) equivalent.
>
> - **Benefit:** Reclaims the sign bit, adding it to the **Node field** (not Sequence) — a 41% increase in safe parallel nodes.
> - **Empirical Status:** ✅ **Verified Hero Case.** Simulation Scenario 1 proved **100% recovery** for a Catastrophic 10,000-node mass-collision.
> - **Critical Data:** Simulation Scenario 9 proves that Signed IDs carry a **1.6x higher statistical risk** than Unsigned; choose Signed only when language support forces it.
> - _Example:_ `uchrono32y` offers **16.7 Million** IDs/year (24-bit), whereas `chrono32y` offers **8.3 Million** (23-bit).
> - _Human-Readable:_ `chrono32y` encodes as a **9-character hyphenated hex** string (e.g., `1F4A-9C2B`) — compact, URL-safe, and verified **Sort-Stable** (Scenario 13).
